joshu's dog --!-- a monk asked joshu, 'has the dog the buddha nature?' joshu replied, 'mu (nothing)!' ---- hyakujo's fox --!-- whenever hyakujo delivered a zen lecture, an old man was always there with the monks listening to it; and when they left the hall, so did he. one day, however, he remained behind, and hyakujo asked,'who are you?' the old man replied,'yes, i am not a human being, but in the far distant past, when the kashapa buddha (the sixth buddha of the seven ancient buddhas) preached in this world, i was the head monk in this mountain area. on one occasion a monk asked me whether an enlightened man could fall again under the law of karma (cause and effect), and i answered that he could not. thus i became a fox for 500 rebirths and am still a fox. i beg you to release me from this condition through your zen words.' then he asked hyakujo,'is an enlightened man subject to the law of karma?' hyakujo answered, 'no one is free from the law of karma.' at the words of hyakujo the old man was enlightened, and said with a bow, 'i am now released from rebirth as a fox and my body will be found on the other side of the mountain. may i request that you bury me as a dead monk?' the next day hyakujo had the karmadana, or deacon, beat the clapper and he informed the monks that after the midday meal there would be a funeral service for a dead monk. 'no one was sick or died,' wondered the monks. 'what does our roshi mean?' after they had eaten, hyakujo led them to the foot of a rock on the furthest side of the mountain, and with his staff poked the dead body of a fox and had it ritually cremated. in the evening hyakujo gave a talk to the monks and told them this story of the law of karma. upon hearing the story, obaku asked hyakujo, 'you said that because a long time ago an old zen master gave a wrong answer he became a fox for 500 rebirths. but suppose every time he answered he had not made a mistake, what would have happened then?' hyakujo replied, 'just come here to me, and i will tell you the answer!' obaku then went up to hyakujo--and slapped the teacher's face. hyakujo, clapping his hands and laughing, exclaimed, 'i thought the persian had a red beard, but here is another one with a red beard!' ---- gutei's finger --!-- gutei raised his finger whenever he was asked a question about zen. a boy attendant began to imitate him in this way. when a visitor asked the boy what his master had preached about, the boy raised his finger. gutei heard about the boy's mischief, seized him and cut off his finger with a knife. as the boy screamed and ran out of the room, gutei called to him. when the boy turned his head to gutei, gutei raised up his own finger. in that instant the boy was enlightened. when gutei was about to die, he said to the assembled monks,'i received this one-finger zen from tenryu. i used it all my life and yet could not exhaust it' and then he passed away. ----  waku'an's 'why no beard?'  --!-- waku'an (looking at bodhidharma's picture) complained, 'why has that barbarian no beard?' ---- kyogen's man hanging in the tree --!-- kyogen said, 'it (zen) is like a man (monk) hanging by his teeth in a tree over a precipice. his hands grasp no branch, his feet rest on no limb, and under the tree another man asks him, 'why did bodhidharma come to china from the west (india)?' if the man in the tree does not answer, he misses the question, and if he answers, he falls and loses his life. now what shall he do?'  ---- the buddha's flower --!-- once upon a time when buddha was in grdhrakuta mountain, he twirled a flower in his finger and held it before his congregation. everyone was silent. only maha kashapa wholeheartedly smiled. buddha said, 'i have the eye of the true teaching, the heart of nirvana, the formless form, the mysterious gate of dharma. beyond the words and beyond all teachings to be transmitted, i now pass this on to maha kashapa.' ---- joshu's washing the bowl --!-- a monk told joshu, 'i have just entered this monastery. i beg you to teach me.' joshu asked, 'have you eaten your rice porridge?' the monk replied, 'i have.' 'then,' said joshu, 'go and wash your bowl.' at that moment the monk was enlightened. ---- keichu's wheel --!-- gettan asked a monk, 'if keichu (the ancient mythological wheel maker) made one hundred carts, and if we took off the wheels and removed the hub uniting the spokes, what would then become apparent? ---- daitsu chisho buddha --!-- a monk asked seijo, 'daitsu chisho buddha did zazen (meditated) for ten kalpas in a meditation hall, could not realize the highest truth, and so could not become fully emancipated. why was this?' seijo said, 'your question is a very appropriate one!' the monk asked again, 'why did he not attain buddhahood by doing zazen in the meditation hall?' seijo replied, 'because he did not.' ---- sozan and poor seizai --!-- a monk named seizai said to sozan, 'i am alone and poor. i beg my teacher to bestow upon me the alms of salvation.' sozan said, 'acarya seizai!' 'yes, sir?' replied seizai. sozan said, 'someone has drunk three bowls of the wine of haku of seigen, but says that he has not yet even moistened his lips.' ---- joshu's hermit --!-- joshu went to a hermit's and asked, 'what's up? what's up?'(='have you any zen?') the hermit lifted up his fist. joshu said, 'the water is too shallow to anchor here,' and went away. joshu visited the hermit once again a few days later and said, 'what's up? what's up?' the hermit raised his fist again. then joshu said, 'well given, well taken, well killed, well saved.' and he bowed to the hermit. ---- zuigan calls himself 'master'  --!-- every day zuigan used to call out to himself, 'master!' and then he answered himself, 'yes, sir!' and he added, 'awake, awake!' and then answered, 'yes, sir! yes, sir!' 'from now onwards, do not be deceived by others!' 'no, sir! i will not, sir!'  ----  tokusan's bowl --!-- one day tokusan came to the dining room from the meditation hall, holding his bowl. seppo saw him coming and asked, 'the dinner drum is not yet beaten. where are you going with your bowl? tokusan went back at once to his room. seppo told about this incident to ganto, who said, 'tokusan as he is, has not penetrated into the ultimate truth of zen.' tokusan heard of this and sent an acolyte to ask ganto to come to him. 'i have heard,' told tokusan, 'you are not approving my zen.' ganto whispered to tokusan what he meant. tokusan said nothing, leaving ganto there. next day, ascending the rostrum, tokusan delivered an entirely different sermon to the monks. ganto went forward in the hall, clapped his hands, laughed and said, 'what a happy thing! the old man has got hold of the ultimate truth of zen. from now on, no one in heaven and on earth can surpass him.' ---- nansen cuts the cat in two --!-- nansen saw the monks of the eastern and western halls fighting over a baby cat. he seized the cat and said, 'if (any of) you can say (a word of zen), you can spare the cat. otherwise i will kill it.' no one could answer. so nansen cut the cat in two . that evening joshu returned and nansen told him what had happened. joshu thereupon took off his sandals and, placing them on his head, walked away. nansen said, 'if only you had been there, you could have saved the cat.' ---- tozan's sixty blows --!-- tozan went to un-mon and un-mon asked him where he had come from. tozan answered, 'from sato!' then un-mon asked, 'where were you then during the summer?' tozan answered, 'at hoji temple in konan province.' un-mon further asked tozan, 'when did you leave there?' tozan replied, 'i left on august 25.' un-mon told tozan, 'you deserve 60 blows, but i will forgive you today!' the next day tozan knelt and deeply bowed to un-mon and said, 'yesterday you forgave me the 60 blows, but i still do not understand in what respect i was wrong.' then un mon told tozan, 'you are really a good-for-nothing rice eater! no wonder you wandered around konan and kosei for nothing!' at this very moment, tozan was awakened. ---- un-mon's seven-fold robe --!-- un-mon said, 'the world is vast and wide; for what is it you put on your seven-piece robe at the sound of the bell?' ---- echu's three calls --!-- echu, called kokushi, the teacher of the emperor, called his attendant, oshin, three times and three times oshin answered, 'yes!' kokushi said, 'i thought that i had offended you, but in reality you offended me!'  ---- tozan's three pounds of flax --!-- a monk asked tozan, 'what is the buddha?' tozan answered, 'three pounds of flax!' ---- nansen's ordinary mind --!-- joshu asked nansen, 'what is the way?' nansen answered, 'your ordinary mind--that is the way.' joshu said, 'can it be grasped (for study)?' nansen replied, 'the more you pursue, the more does it slip away.' joshu asked once more, 'how can you know it is the way?' nansen responded, 'the way does not belong to knowledge, nor does it belong to non knowledge. knowledge is illusion. non knowledge is beyond discrimination. when you get to this way without doubt, you are free like the vastness of space, an unfathomable void, so how can you explain it by yes or no?' upon hearing this, joshu was awakened. ---- shogen's strong man --!-- shogen said,'why is it that a man of strength cannot lift up his own legs and stand up (for zen)?' and again, 'it is not with our tongue that we speak.' ---- un-mon's dried dung --!-- a monk asked un-mon,'what is buddha?' un-mon answered him, 'dried dung.' ----  kashapa's flag pole --!-- ananda asked maha kashapa, 'buddha gave you the golden woven robe of successorship. what else did he give you?' kashapa said, 'ananda!' 'yes!' answered ananda. 'knock down the flagpole at the gate!' said kashapa.  ---- eno's good and evil --!-- eno, the sixth patriarch, was pursued by monk emyo up to daiyurei. the patriarch, seeing emyo coming, laid the robe and the bowl on a rock, and said to him, 'this robe represents the faith. is it to be fought for by force? you may take them now.' emyo went to move the bowl and the robe and yet they were as heavy as mountains. he could not move them. hesitating and trembling, emyo asked the patriarch, 'i come for the teaching, not for the robe. please enlighten me!' the patriarch said, 'what is primordially emyo (i.e., your true self), if you do not think this is good nor do you think this is evil?' at that moment emyo was greatly awakened. his whole body was covered with sweat. emyo cried, bowed, and said, 'is there or is there not any other (deep) significance (in zen) than your secret words and teachings a minute ago?' the patriarch answered, 'what i have told you is no secret at all. once you have realized your own true self, the depth (in zen) rather belongs to you!' emyo said, 'when i was at obai with the other monks, i never realized what my true self was. now you have dispersed the clouds of my ignorance to realize it, just like a man capable of discerning warm and cold by tasting water. from now on you are my teacher!' the patriarch said, 'we both have obai for our teacher. guard your own self!' ---- fuketsu's silence and words --!-- a monk asked fuketsu, 'without words or without silence transgressing, how can one be unmistakably one with the universe?' fuketsu said, 'i often think of march in konan (southern china). the birds sing among hundreds of flagrant flowers.' ---- kyozan's sermon from the third seat --!-- in a dream kyozan went to maitreya's pure land and sat in the third seat. a monk there beat the gavel and said, 'today the one in the third seat will give a sermon.' kyozan arose, hit the gavel and said,'the truth of mahayana is beyond any verbal expression! listen, listen!' ---- two monks roll up the blinds --!-- hogen of seiryo came to the hall to speak to the monks before the midday meal. he pointed with his finger to the bamboo blinds. at this moment two monks rose and rolled the blinds up. hogen observed, 'one has it, the other hasn't it.' ---- nansen's no mind, no buddha --!-- a monk asked nansen, 'is there any teaching no master has ever preached before?' nansen replied, 'yes, there is.' 'what is it?' asked the monk. nansen answered, 'it is not mind, it is not buddha, it is not things.' ---- ryutan's candle --!-- one night tokusan went to ryutan to ask for his teaching. after tokusan's many questions, ryutan said to tokusan at last, 'it is late. why don't you retire?' so tokusan bowed, lifted the screen and was ready to go out, observing, 'it is very dark outside.' ryutan lit a candle and offered it to tokusan. just as tokusan received it, ryutan blew it out. at that moment the mind of tokusan was opened. 'what have you realized?' asked ryutan to tokusan, who replied, 'from now on i will not doubt what you have said.' the next day ryutan ascended the rostrum and declared to the monks, 'among you there is one monk whose teeth are like the sword tree, his mouth is like the blood bowl. strike him with a stick, he won't turn his head to look at you. some day he will climb the highest peaks and carry out my teaching there.' on that day, in front of the lecture hall, tokusan burned to ashes his commentaries on the sutras and declared, 'in comparison to this awareness, all the most profound teachings are like a single hair in vast space. however deep the complicated knowledge of the world, compared to this enlightenment it is like one drop of water in the ocean.' then he left the monastery. ---- eno's flag --!--  the wind was flapping a temple flag, and two monks were arguing about the flag. one said, 'the flag is moving.' the other said, 'the wind is moving.' they could not agree, no matter how hard they debated. the sixth patriarch, eno, happened to come by and said, 'not the wind, not the flag. it is the mind that is moving!' the two monks were struck with awe. ---- baso's very mind --!-- daibai asked baso, what is the buddha?' baso answered, 'the mind is the buddha.' ----  joshu investigates an old woman --!-- a (travelling) monk asked an old woman the way to taizan. the old woman said, 'go straight ahead.' when the monk proceeded a few steps, she said to herself, 'this monk with such spirit also goes off like that!' afterwards, another monk told joshu about this, and joshu said, 'wait until i go and investigate the old woman.' the next day off joshu went and asked the same question and the old woman gave the same answer. upon his return, joshu told the congregation of monks, 'i have investigated the old woman of taizan.' ---- a 'pagan' asks buddha --!-- a 'pagan' asked buddha, 'with words, with silence, will you tell me (the way)?' buddha silently kept meditating. the 'pagan' bowed and thanked the buddha, saying, 'with the compassion you have cleared away the clouds of my mind and have made me enter into the awakening.' after he left, ananda asked the buddha what he had attained. the buddha said, 'a good horse runs even a shadow of the whip.' ---- neither mind nor buddha --!-- a monk asked baso, 'what is the buddha?' baso replied, 'not mind, not buddha.'  ---- nansen's no way --!-- nansen said, 'mind is not buddha. knowledge is not the way.' ---- two souls --!-- goso asked a monk, 'sei, the chinese girl, who was separated from her soul. which was the real sei?' ---- goso's no words, no silence --!-- goso said, 'when you meet a man of the way on the road, greet him not with words, nor with silence. tell me, how will you greet him?' ---- joshu's oak tree in the garden --!-- a monk asked joshu, 'with what intention did bodhidharma come to china?' joshu answered, 'the oak tree in the front garden.' ---- goso's buffalo --!-- goso asked, 'a water buffalo goes out of his 'enclosure.' the head, the horns, and the four legs go through, but why doesn't the tail, too?' ---- un-mon and trap into words --!-- as soon as a monk stated un-mon, 'the radiance of the buddha quietly and restlessly illuminates the whole universe', un-mon asked him, 'are these you are reciting not the words of chosetzu shusai?' the monk replied, 'yes, they are.' un-mon said, 'you are trapped in words!' afterwards shishin brought up the matter once more and said, 'tell me, how was the monk trapped in words?' ---- kicking the drinking water jar --!-- during his stay under master hyakujo, isan was a cooking monk. as master hyakujo wished to send a monk to found the new monastery called the great mount i, maser hyakujo told the chief monk and all other monks that he would choose the one who would demonstrate himself as the best among them. then master hyakujo brought out a drinking water jar, put it down and said, 'you cannot call it a water jar. then, what will you call it?' the chief monk said, 'one cannot call it a wooden stick.' then, when master hyakujo turned to isan, isan kicked the jar and walked away. master hyakujo laughed and said, 'the chief monk lost it to isan.' he made isan the founder of the great i-san monastery. ---- bodhidharma's peace of mind --!-- boddhidharma sit facing the stone wall. the second patriarch, suika, stood long in the thick snow. finally, he severed his own arm and presented it to bodhidharma. he said, 'your student cannot pacify his mind. you, the first patriarch, please, give me peace of mind!' the first patriarch replied, 'bring that mind, i will calm it down!' the second patriarch said, 'i search for it everywhere, but i cannot find it!' boddhidharma replied, 'i have already pacified it for you!' ---- a woman comes out of meditation --!-- when the wisest boddhisattva manjusuri, who is supposed to be next in order to shakyamuni buddha, found that the buddha' gathering was adjourned and each was going back to his/her land. observing one woman still deep in meditation near shakyamuni, manjusuri properly bowed and asked shakyamuni buddha, 'that woman has been able to reach that state of enlightenment and why have i not?' shakyamuni replied, 'bring her from the samadhi and ask her yourself!' manjusuri went round the woman three times and snapped his fingers and yet she was undisturbed in meditation. so manjusuri held her high up in his hand and brought her to the first of three meditative heavens (totally detached from any lust) and exhausted all his mystical powers in vain (to awaken her). observing this, shakyamuni said, 'even a hundred thousand manjusris could not awaken her from samadi. there resides momyo (avidya) boddhisattva, the lowest of all, below this place past twelve hundred million lands. he alone can raise her from her deep meditation.' no sooner had the shakyamuni spoken than that boddhisattva sprang up out of the earth, bowed and paid his homage to shakyamuni. by shakyamuni order, mo-myo boddhisattva snapped his fingers. instantly the woman came out of meditation and stood up. ---- shuzan's bamboo spatula --!-- master shuzan held out his bamboo spatula and asked, 'if you call this a bamboo spatula, you give umbrage (to the principle of zen). if you call this no bamboo spatula, you violate the law (of common-sense). what will all of you call this?'  ---- basho's staff --!-- master basho said to his disciples, 'if you have the staff, i will give it to you. if you have no staff, i will take it away from you!' ---- who is he? --!-- to tozan, master hoen the fifth patriarch said, 'shakyamuni and maitreya boddhisattva, both are his slaves. well, tell me: who is he?' ---- proceed beyond the top of the 100 foot high pole --!-- master sekiso said, 'you are at the top of the 100 foot high pole. how will you make a step further?' another zen master of ancient times said, 'one who sits on top of the 100 foot pole has not quite attained true enlightenment. make another step forward from the top of the pole and throw one's own body into the 100,000 universes.'  ---- tosotsu's three barriers --!-- master tosotsu, setting up the three barriers, always tried the pursuer of the way: 'to search for the way, the zen student tries to grasp one's own nature and be enlightened.' 'now where is your true nature?' secondly, 'once having grasped one's own nature, one is free from birth and death. if then, one's eyeballs have dropped dead, how can one be free from life?' thirdly, 'being free from birth and death, one instantly knows where to go after death.' 'being dead and the body dispersed into the four elements, where then does one go?' ---- the one road of kempo  --!-- a student monk asked master kempo, 'i understand that all buddha of the whole universe enter the one road into nirvana. where is this one road? kempo raised his walking stick, drew the figure 'one' and said, 'here it is.' later, this monk went to umon to ask the question. umon, turning around his fan, said, 'this fan will reach the thirty-third heaven and hit the nose of sakra devendra, the highest deity in these heavens. it is like the giant carp of the eastern sea tipping over with its tail a rain cloud to have the rain pour down.' ----
