the highest meaning of the holy truths --!-- emperor wu of liang asked the great master bodhidharma, 'what is the highest meaning of the holy truths?'bodhidharma said, 'empty, without holiness.' the emperor said, 'who is facing me?' bodhidharma replied, 'i don't know.' the emperor did not understand. after this bodhidharma crossed the yangtse river and came to the kingdom of wei. later the emperor brought this up to master chih and asked him about it. master chih asked, 'does your majesty know who this man is?' the emperor said, 'i don't know.' master chih said, 'he is the mahasattva avalokitesvara, transmitting the buddha mind seal. ' the emperor felt regretful, so he wanted to send an emissary to go invite (bodhidharma to return). master chih told him, 'your majesty, don't say that you will send someone to fetch him back. even if everyone in the whole country were to go after him, he still wouldn't return.' ---- the ultimate path is without difficulty --!-- chao chou, teaching the assembly, said,  'the ultimate path is without difficulty; just avoid picking and choosing. as soon as there are words spoken, ,this is picking and choosing,' ,this is clarity.' this old monk does not abide within clarity; do you still preserve anything or not?' at that time a certain monk asked, ,since you do not abide within clarity, what do you preserve?' chao chou replied, ' don't know either.' the monk said, 'since you don't know, teacher, why do you nevertheless say that you do not abide within clarity?' chao chou said, 'it is enough to ask about the matter; bow and withdraw.' ---- master ma is unwell --!-- great master ma was unwell. the temple superintendent asked him, 'teacher, how has your venerable health been in recent days?' the great master said, 'sun face buddha, moon face buddha.' ---- te shan carrying his bundle --!-- when te shan arrived at kuei shan, he carried his bundle with him into the teaching hall, where he crossed from east to west and from west to east.  he looked around and said, 'there's nothing, no one.' then he went out. hsueh tou added the comment, 'completely exposed.' but when te shan got to the monastery gate, he said, 'still, i shouldn't be so coarse.' so he reentered (the hall) with full ceremony to meet (kuei shan).  as kuei shan sat there, te shan held up his sitting mat and said, 'teacher!' kuei shan reached for his whisk, whereupon te shan shouted, shook out his sleeves, and left. hsueh tou added the comment, 'completely exposed.' te shan turned his back on the teaching hall, put on his straw sandals, and departed. that evening kuei shan asked the head monk, 'where is that newcomer who just came?' the head monk answered, 'at that time he turned his back on the teaching hall, put on his straw sandals, and departed.' kuei shan said, 'hereafter that lad will go to the summit of a solitary peak, build himself a grass hut, and go on scolding the buddhas and reviling the patriarchs.' hsueh tou added the comment, 'he adds frost to snow.' ---- hsueh feng's grain of rice --!-- hsueh feng, teaching his community, said, 'pick up the whole great earth in your fingers, and it's as big as a grain of rice. throw it down before you: if, like a lacquer bucket, you don't understand, i'll beat the drum to call everyone to look.' ---- yun men's every day is a good day --!-- yun men said, 'i don't ask you about before the fifteenth day;  try to say something about after the fifteenth day.' yun men himself answered for everyone, 'every day is a good day.' ---- hui ch'ao asks about buddha --!-- a monk (named hui ch'ao) asked fa yen,t 'hui ch'ao asks the teacher, what is buddha?' fa yen said, 'you are hui ch'ao.' ---- ts'ui yen's eyebrows --!-- at the end of the summer retreat ts'ui yen said to the community, 'all summer long i've been talking to you, brothers; look and see if my eyebrows are still there.'m pao fu said, 'the thief's heart is cowardly.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'grown.' yun men said, 'a barrier.'  ---- chao chou's four gates --!-- a monk asked chao chou, 'what is chao chou?' chao chou replied, 'east gate, west gate, south gate, north gate.' ---- mu chou's thieving phoney --!-- mu chou asked a monk, 'where have you just come from?' the monk immediately shouted. mu chou said, 'i've been shouted at by you once.' again the monk shouted. mu chou said, 'after three or four shouts, then what?' the monk had nothing to say.  mu chou then hit him and said,  'what a thieving phoney you are! ' ---- huang po's gobblers of dregs  --!-- huang po, instructing the community, said, 'all of you people are gobblers of dregs; if you go on travelling around this way, where will you have today? do you know that there are no teachers of ch'an in all of china?' at that time a monk came forward and said, 'then what about those in various places who order followers and lead communities? ' huang po said, 'i do not say that there is no ch'an; it's just that there are no teachers. '  ---- tung shan's three pounds of hemp  --!-- a monk asked tung shan, 'what is buddha?' tung shan said, 'three pounds of hemp.' ---- pa ling's snow in a silver bowl --!-- a monk asked pa ling, 'what is the school of kanadeva?' pa ling said, 'piling up snow in a silver bowl.'  ---- yun men's appropriate statement --!-- a monk asked yun men, 'what are the teachings of a whole lifetime? ' yun men said, 'an appropriate statement.' ---- yun men's upside-down statement --!-- a monk asked yun men, 'when it's not the present intellect and it's not the present phenomena, what is it?'·a yun men said, 'an upside-down statement.' ---- ching ch'ing's man in the weeds --!-- a monk asked ching ch'ing, 'i am breaking out; i ask the teacher to break in.' ching ch'ing said, 'can you live or not?' the monk said, 'if i weren't alive, i'd be laughed at by people.' ching ch'ing said, 'you too are a man in the weeds.' ---- hsiang lin's meaning of the coming from the west --!-- a monk asked hsiang lin, 'what is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west?' hsiang lin said, 'sitting for a long time becomes toilsome.'---- national teacher chung's seamless monument --!-- emperor su tsung asked national teacher hui chung, 'after you die, what will you need?' the national teacher said, 'build a seamless monument for me.' the emperor said, 'please tell me, master, what the monument would look like.' the national teacher was silent for a long time; then he asked, 'do you understand?' the emperor said, 'i don't understand.' the national teacher said, 'i have a disciple to whom i have transmitted the teaching, tan yuan, who is well versed in this matter. please summon him and ask him about it.'' after the national teacher passed on, the emperor summoned tan yuan and asked him what the meaning of this was. tan yuan said, south of hsiang, north of t'an;   hsueh tou added the comment, 'a single hand does not make random sound.' in between there's gold sufficient to a nation. hsueh tou added the comment, 'a rough-hewn staf£.' beneath the shadowless tree, the community ferryboat;  hsueh tou added the comment, 'the sea is calm, the rivers are clear.' within the crystal palace, there's no one who knows. hsueh tou added the comment, 'he has raised it up.' ---- chu ti's one-finger ch'a --!-- whenever anything was asked,  master chu ti would just raise one finger. ---- lung ya's meaning of the coming from the west --!-- lung ya asked ts'ui wei, 'what is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west?' wei said, 'pass me the meditation brace.' ya gave the meditation brace to wei; wei took it and hit him. ya said, 'since you hit me i let you hit me. in essence, though, there is no meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west.' ya also asked lin chi, 'what is the meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west?' chi said, 'pass me the cushion.' ya took the cushion and handed it to lin chi; chi took it and hit him.  ya said, 'since you hit me i let you hit me. in essence, though, there is no meaning of the patriarch's coming from the west.' ---- chih men's lotus flower, lotus leaves --!-- a monk asked chih men, 'how is it when the lotus flower has not yet emerged from the water?' chih men said, 'a lotus flower.' the monk said, 'what about after it has emerged from the water?' men said, 'lotus leaves.' ---- hsueh feng's turtle-nosed snake --!-- hsueh feng taught the assembly saying, 'on south mountain there's a turtle-nosed snake. all of you people must take a good look.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'in the hall today there certainly are people who are losing their bodies and their lives.' a monk related this to hsuan sha.  hsuan sha said, 'it takes elder brother leng (ch'ang ch'ing) to be like this. nevertheless, i am not this way.' the monk asked, 'what about you, teacher?' hsuan sha said, 'why make use of 'south mountain'?' yun men took his staff and threw it down in front of hsueh feng, making a gesture of fright. ---- pao fu's summit of the mystic peak --!-- once when pao fu and ch'ang ch'ing were wandering in the mountains, pao fu pointed with his hand and said, 'right here is the summit of the mystic peak.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'indeed it is. what a pity!' hsueh tou added a word, saying, 'today what is the purpose of travelling the mountains together with these fellows?' he also said, 'hundreds of thousands of years hence, i don't say there are none, just that they will be few.' later this (dialogue between pao fu and ch'ang ch'ing) was quoted to ching ch'ing.  ching ch'ing said, 'if it hadn't been mr. sun (pao fu), then you would have seen skulls covering the fields.' ---- kuei shan and iron grindstone liu --!-- iron grindstone liu arrived at kuei shan. kuei shan said, 'old cow, so you've come!' the grindstone said, 'tomorrow there's a great communal feast on t'ai shan; are you going to go, teacher?' kuei shan relaxed his body and lay down; the grindstone immediately left.  ---- the hermit of lotus flower peak holds up his staff --!-- the hermit of lotus flower peak held up his staff and showed it to the assembly saying, 'when the ancients got here, why didn't they consent to stay here?' there was no answer from the assembly, so he himself answered for them, 'because they did not gain strength on the road.' again he said, 'in the end, how is it?' and again he himself answered in their place, 'with my staff across my shoulder, i pay no heed to people-! go straight into the myriad peaks.' ---- pai chang's sitting alone on ta hsiung mountain  --!-- a monk asked pai chang, 'what's the extraordinary affair?' chang said, 'sitting alone on ta hsiung mountain.' the monk bowed; chang thereupon hit him. ---- yun men's the body exposed, the golden wind --!-- a monk asked yun men, 'how is it when the tree withers and the leaves fall?' yun men said, 'body exposed in the golden wind.'  ---- nan ch'uan's truth that's never been spoken --!-- nan ch'uan went to see master nirvana of pai chang (mountain.) chang asked, 'have all the sages since antiquity had a truth that they haven't spoken for people?' ch'uan said, 'they have.' chang said, 'what is the truth that hasn't been spoken for people?' ch'uan said, 'it's not mind, it's not buddha, it's not any thing.' chang said, 'you said it.' ch'uan said, 'i am just thus. what about you, teacher?' chang said, 'i am not a great man of knowledge either: how would i know whether it has been spoken or not?' ch'uan said, 'i don't understand.' chang said, 'i've already spoken too much for you.' ---- ta sui's it goes along with it --!-- a monk asked ta sui, 'the conflagration at the end of the eon sweeps through and the universe is totally destroyed. i wonder, is this one destroyed or not?' sui said, 'it is destroyed.' the monk said, 'if so, then this goes along with it.' sui said, 'it goes along with it.' ---- chao chou's big turnips --!-- a monk asked chao chou, 'teacher, i have heard that you have personally seen nan ch'uan. is this true or not?' chou said, 'chen chou produces big turnips.' ---- ma ku carrying his ring-staff --!-- ma ku, carrying his ring-staff, a went to chang ching. he circled the meditation seat three times, then shook his staff once and stood there upright. chang ching said, 'correct. correct.' (hsueh tou added a word, saying 'wrong!') ma ku also went to nan ch'uan: he circled the meditation seat three times, shook his staff once and stood there upright.  nan ch'uan said, 'incorrect. incorrect.' (hsueh tou added a word, saying, 'wrong!') ma ku then said, 'chang ching said 'correct'; why do you say 'incorrect,' master? ' nan ch'uan said, 'chang ching is correct; it's you who are incorrect.  this is what is turned about by the power of the wind; in the end it breaks down and disintegrates.' ---- elder ting stands motionless --!-- elder ting asked lin chi, 'what is the great meaning of the buddhist teaching?' chi came down off his meditation seat, grabbed and held (ting), gave him a slap, and then pushed him away. ting stood there motionless. a monk standing by said, 'elder ting, why do you not bow?' just as ting bowed,s he suddenly was greatly enlightened.  ---- ministry president ch'en sees tzufu --!-- ch'en ts'ao, ministry president, went to see tzu fu. when fu saw him coming, he immediately drew a circle. ts'ao said, 'my coming here like this has already missed the pointi how much more so, to go on and draw a circle!' fu thereupon closed the door of his room.  hsueh tau said, 'ch'en ts'ao has just one eye.'  ---- yang shan asks 'where have you come from?'' --!-- yang shan asked a monk, 'where have you just come from?' the monk said, 'mount lu.' yang shan said, 'did you visit five elders peak?' the monk said, 'i didn't get there.' yang shan said, 'you never visited the mountain at all.' (later,) yun men said, 'these words were all for the sake of compassion; thus they had a conversation in the weeds.' ---- the dialogue of manjusri and wucho --!-- manjusri asked wu cho, 'where have you just come from?' wu cho said, 'the south.' manjusri said, 'how is the buddhist teaching being carried on in the south?' wu cho said, 'monks of the last age have little regard for the rules of discipline.' manjusri said, 'how numerous are the congregations?' wu cho said, 'some three hundred, some five hundred.' wu cho asked manjusri, 'how is it being carried on hereabouts?' manjusri said, 'ordinary people and sages dwell together; dragons and snakes intermingle.' wu cho said, 'how numerous are the congregations?' manjusri said, 'in front, three by three; in back, three by three.' ---- ch'ang sha wandering in the mountains --!-- one day ch'ang sha went wandering in the mountains. upon returning, when he got to the gate,t the head monk asked, 'where are you coming from, master?' sha said, 'from wandering in the mountains.' the head monk asked, 'where did you go? ' sha said, 'first i went pursuing the fragrant grasses; then i returned following the falling flowers.' the head monk said, 'how very much like the sense of springtime.' sha said, 'it even surpasses the autumn dew' dripping on the lotuses.' hsueh tou added the remark, 'thanks for your reply.'  ---- p'an shan's there is nothing in the world --!-- p'an shan imparted the words which said, there is nothing in the triple world; where can mind be found?' ---- feng hsueh's workings of the iron --!-- at the government headquarters in ying chou, feng hsueh entered the hall and said,t 'the patriarchal masters' mind seal is formed like the workings of the iron ox:a when taken away, the impression remains; when left there, then the impression is ruined. but if neither removed nor left there,s is sealing right or is not sealing right? ' at that time there was a certain elder lu p'i who came forth and said, 'i have the workings of the iron ox: please, teacher, do not impress the seal.' hsueh said, 'accustomed to scouring the oceans fishing for whales, i regret to find instead a frog crawling in the muddy sand.' p'i stood there thinking. hsueh shouted and said, 'elder, why do you not speak further? ' p'i hesitated;  hsueh hit him with his whisk.d hsueh said, 'do you still remember the words? try to quote them.' as p'i was about to open his mouth,t hsueh hit him again with his whisk. the governor said, 'the buddhist law and the law of kings are the same.' hsueh said, 'what principle have you seen?' the governor said, 'when you do not settle what is to be settled, instead you bring about disorder.'b hseuh thereupon descended from his seat. ---- yun men's flowering hedge --!-- a monk asked yun men, 'what is the pure body of reality? ' yun men said, 'a flowering hedge.' the monk asked, 'what is it like when one goes on in just such a way? ' yun men said, 'a golden-haired lion.'a ---- nan ch'uan's it's like a dream --!-- as the officer lu hsuan was talking with nan ch'uan, he said, 'master of the teachings chao said, 'heaven, earth, and i have the same root; myriad things and i are one body.' this is quite marvelous .'' nan ch'uan pointed to a flower in the garden. he called to the officer and said, 'people these days see this flower as a dream.' ----  chao chou's man who has died the great deat --!-- chao chou asked t'ou tzu, 'how is it when a man who has died the great death returns to life? ' t'ou tzu said, 'he must not go by night: he must get there in daylight.' ---- layman p'ang's good snowflake --!-- when layman p'ang took leave of yao shan, shan ordered ten ch'an travellers to escort him to the gate. the layman pointed to the snow in the air and said, 'good snowflakesthey don't fall in any other place.' at the time one of the ch'an travellers named ch'uan said, 'where do they fall?' the layman slapped him once. ch'uan said, 'even a layman shouldn't be so coarse.' the layman said, 'though you call yourself a ch'an traveller this way, the king of death still won't let you go.' ch'uan said, 'how about you, layman?' again the layman slapped him and said, 'your eyes see like a blind man, your mouth speaks like a mute.'  hsueh tau said besides, 'when p'ang first spoke i just would have made a snowball and hit him with it.' ---- tung shan's no cold or heat --!-- a monk asked tung shan, 'when cold and heat come, how can we avoid them?' shan said, 'why don't you go to the place where there is no cold or heat?' the monk said, 'what is the place where there is no cold or heat? ' tung shan said, 'when it's cold, the cold kills you when it's hot, the heat kills you.' ---- ho shan's knowing how to beat the drum --!-- ho shan imparted some words saying, 'cultivating study is called 'learning.' cutting off study is called 'neamess.' going beyond these two is to be considered real going beyond. ' a monk came forward and asked, 'what is 'real going beyond'?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.' again he asked, 'what is the real truth?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.' again he asked, ''mind is buddha'-l'm not asking about this. what is not mind and not buddha?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.'b again he asked, 'when a transcendent man comes, how do you receive him?' shan said, 'knowing how to beat the drum.' ---- chao chou's seven-pound cloth shirt  --!-- a monk asked chao chou, 'the myriad things return to one. where does the one return to?' chou said, 'when i was in ch'ing chou i made a cloth shirt. it weighed seven pounds.'  ---- ching ch'ing's sound of raindrops --!-- ching ch'ing asked a monk, 'what sound is that outside the gate?' the monk said, 'the sound of raindrops.' ch'ing said, 'sentient beings are inverted. they lose themselves and follow after things.' the monk said, 'what about you, teacher? ' ch'ing said, 'i almost don't lose mysel£.' the monk said, 'what is the meaning of 'i almost don't lose myself'? ' ch'ing said, 'though it still should be easy to express oneself, to say the whole thing has to be difficult.'  ---- ynn men's six do not take it in  --!-- a monk asked yun men, 'what is the body of reality?'a men said, 'six do not take it in.' ---- turning over the tea kettle at chao ch'ing  --!-- when minister wang entered chao ch'ing, they were making tea. at the time elder lang was holding the kettle for ming chao. lang turned the tea kettle over. seeing this, the minister asked the elder, 'what's under the tea stove?' lang said, the spirit who holds up stoves.' the minister said, 'if it's the spirit who holds up stoves, why then did you tum over the tea kettle?' lang said, 'serve as an official for a thousand days, lose it in a single moming.' the minister shook out his sleeves and left.  ming chao said, elder lang, you've eaten chao ch'ing food, but still you go beyond the river to make noise gathering charred wood.' lang said, 'what about you, teacher?' ming chao said, the spirit got the advantage.' hsueh tau said, 'at the time i just would have kicked over the tea stove.' ---- san sheng's golden fish who has passed through the net --!-- san sheng asked hsueh feng, 'i wonder, what does the golden fish who has passed through the net use for food?' feng said, 'when you come out of the net i'll tell you.' sheng said, 'the teacher of fifteen-hundred people and you don't even know what to say!' feng said, 'my affairs as abbot are many and complicated.'  ---- yun men's every atom samadhi --!--  a monk asked yun men, 'what is every atom samadhi?' men said, 'food in the bowl, water in the bucket.'  ---- hsueh feng's what is it? --!-- when hsueh feng was living in a hut, there were two monks who came to pay their respects. seeing them coming, he pushed open the door of the hut with his hand, popped out, and said, 'what is it?' a monk also said, 'what is it?' feng lowered his head and went back inside the hut. later the monk came to yen t'ou. t'ou asked, 'where are you coming from?' the monk said, 'i've come from ling nan.' t'ou said, 'did you ever go to hsueh feng?' the monk said, 'i went there.' t'ou said, 'what did he have to say?' the monk recounted the preceding story. t'ou said, 'what did he say?' the monk said, 'he said nothing; he lowered his head and went back inside the hut.' t'ou said, 'alas! it's too bad i didn't tell him the last word before;  if i had told him, no one on earth could cope with old hsueh.' at the end of the summer the monk again brought up the preceding story to ask for instruction. t'ou said, 'why didn't you ask earlier?' the monk said, 'i didn't dare to be casual.' t'ou said, 'though hsueh feng is born of the same lineage as me, he doesn't die in the same lineage as me. if you want to know the last word, just this is it.' ---- chao chou lets asses cross, lets horses cross --!-- a monk asked chao chou, 'for a long time i've heard of the stone bridge of chao chou, but now that i've come here i just see a simple log bridge.' chou said, 'you just see the log bridge; you don't see the stone bridge.' the monk said, 'what is the stone bridge?' chou said, 'it lets asses cross, it lets horses cross.' ---- pai chang's wild ducks --!-- once when great master ma and pai chang were walking together they saw some wild ducks fly by. the great master asked, 'what is that?' chang said, 'wild ducks.' the great master said, 'where have they gone? ' chang said, 'they've flown away.' the great master then twisted pai chang's nose. chang cried out in pain.  the great master said, 'when have they ever flown away?' ---- yun men extends both hands --!-- yun men asked a monk, 'where did you come here from?' the monk said, 'hsi ch'an.' yun men said, 'what words and phrases are there at hsi ch'an these days?' the monk extended both handsi yun men slapped him once. the monk said, 'i'm still talking.' yun men then extended his two hands.? the monk was speechless, so yun men hit him. ---- tao wu's condolence call --!-- tao wu and chien yuan went to a house to make a condolence call. yuan hit the coffin and said, 'alive or dead?' wu said, 'i won't say alive, and i won't say dead.' yuan said, 'why won't you say?' wu said, 'i won't say.' halfway back, as they were returning, yuan said, 'tell me right away, teacher; if you don't tell me, i'll hit you.' wu said, 'you may hit me, but i won't say,' yuan then hit him. later tao wu passed on. yuan went to shih shuang and brought up the foregoing story. shuang said, 'i won't say alive, and i won't say dead.' yuan said, 'why won't you say?' shuang said, 'i won't say, i won't say.' at these words yuan had an insight.' one day yuan took a hoe into the teaching hall and crossed back and forth, from east to west and west to east. shuang said, 'what are you doing? ' yuan said, 'i'm looking for relics of our late master.' shuang said, 'vast waves spread far and wide, foaming billows flood the skies-what relics of our late master are you looking for?' hsueh tau added a comment saying, 'heavens! heavens!' yuan said, 'this is just where i should apply effort.' fu of t'ai yuan said, 'the late master's relics are still present.' ---- ch'in shan's one arrowpoint smashes three barriers --!-- ch'an traveller liang asked ch'in shan, 'how is it when a single arrowhead smashes three barriers?'  shan said, 'bring out the lord within the barriers for me to see.' liang said, 'so then knowing my fault i must change.' shan said, 'why wait any longer?' liang said, 'a well-shot arrow doesn't hit anywhere,' and (started to) leave. shan said, 'come here a minute.' liang turned his head;  shan held him tight and said, 'leaving aside for the moment a single arrowhead smashing three barriers, let's see you shoot an arrow.' liang hesitated/ so shan hit him seven times and said, 'i'll allow as this fellow will be doubting for thirty more years.' ---- chao chou's stupid oaf --!-- a monk asked chao chou, ' 'the ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing.' what is not picking and choosing?' chou said, ' 'in the heavens and on earth i alone am the honored one.' ' the monk said, 'this is still picking and choosing.' chou said, 'stupid oaf! where is the picking and choosing? ' the monk was speechless.  ---- chao chou can't explain --!-- a monk asked chao chou, ' 'the ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing'-isn't this a cliche for people of these times?' chou said, 'once someone asked me, and i really couldn't explain for five years.' ---- chao chou's why not quote it fully? --!-- a monk asked chao chou, ' 'the ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing. as soon as there are words and speech, this is picking and choosing.' so how do you help people, teacher? ' chou said, 'why don't you quote this saying in full?' the monk said, 'i only remember up to here.' chou said, 'it's just this: 'this ultimate path has no difficulties-just avoid picking and choosing.' ' ---- yun men's staff changes into a dragon --!-- yun men showed his staff to the assembly and said,  'the staff has changed into a dragon and swallowed the universe. mountains, rivers, the great earth-where are they to be found?' ---- feng hsueh's one atom of dust --!-- feng hsueh, giving a talk, said,l'if you set up a single atom of dust, the nation flourishes; if you do not set up a single atom of dust, the nation perishes.' hsueh tou raised his staff and said, 'are there any patchrobed monks who will live together and die together?' ---- yun men's within there is a jewel ---- yun men said to the community, 'within heaven and earth, through space and time,  there is a jewel,  hidden inside the mountain of form. pick up a lamp and go into the buddhahall; take the triple gate and bring it on the lamp.' ---- nan ch'uan kills a cat --!-- at nan ch'uan's place one day the (monks of) the eastern and western halls were arguing about a cat. when nan ch'uan saw this, he then held up the cat and said, 'if you can speak, then i will not kill it.' no one in the community replied; nan ch'uan cut the cat into two pieces.  ---- nan ch'uan questions chao chou --!-- nan ch'uan recited the preceding story to question chao chou. chou immediately took off his straw sandals, placed them on his head, and left. nan ch'uan said, 'if you had been here, you could have saved the cat.' ---- an outsider questions the buddha --!-- an outsider asked the buddha, 'i do not ask about the spoken or the unspoken.' the world honored one remained silent. the outsider sighed in admiration and said, 'the world honored one's great kindness and great compassion have opened up my clouds of illusion and let me gain entry.' after the outsider had left, ananda asked the buddha, 'what did the outsider realize, that he said he had gained entry?' the buddha said, 'like a good horse, he goes as soon as he sees the shadow of the whip.' ---- yen t'ou's getting huang ch'ao's sword --!-- yen t'ou asked a monk, 'where do you come from?' the monk said, 'from the western capital.' yen t'ou said, 'after huang ch'ao had gone, did you get his sword?' the monk said, 'i got it.' yen t'ou extended his neck, came near and said, 'yaa!' the monk said, 'your head has fallen, master.' yen t'ou laughed out loud.  later that monk went to hsueh feng.  feng asked, 'where did you come from?' the monk said, 'from yen t'ou.' hsueh feng said, 'what did he have to say?' the monk recounted the preceding story. hsueh feng hit him thirty blows with his staff and drove him out. ---- mahasattva fu expounds the scripture --!-- emperor wu of liang requested mahasattva fu to expound the diamond cutter scripture. the mahasattva shook the desk once, then got down off the seat.  emperor wu was astonished. master chih asked him, 'does your majesty understand?' the emperor said, 'i do not understand.' master chih said, 'the mahasattva fu has expounded the scripture.' ---- yang shan's what's your name? --!-- yang shan asked san sheng, 'what is your name?' sheng said, 'hui chi.' yang shan said, 'hui chi? that's me.' sheng said, 'my name is hui jan.' yang shan laughed aloud.  ---- nan ch'uan's circle --!-- nan ch'uan, kuei tsung, and ma ku went together to pay respects to national teacher chung. when they got halfway there, nan ch'uan drew a circle on the ground and said, 'if you can speak, then let's go on.' kuei tsung sat down inside the circle; ma ku curtseyed. nan ch'uan said, 'then let's not go on.' kuei tsung said, 'what's going on in your mind?'  ---- kuei shan attends on pai chang --!-- kuei shan, wu feng, and yun yen were together attending on pai chang. pai chang asked kuei shan, 'with your throat, mouth, and lips shut, how will you speak?' kuei shan said, 'please, teacher, you speak instead.' chang said, 'i don't refuse to speak to you, but i fear that (if i did) in the future i would be bereft of descendants.' ---- wu feng's shut up, teacher --!-- pai chang also asked wu feng, 'with your throat, mouth, and lips shut, how will you speak?' feng said, 'teacher, you too should shut up.' chang said, 'where there's no one, i shade my eyes with my hand and gaze out towards you.' ---- pai chang questions yun yen --!-- pai chang also asked yun yen, 'with your throat, mouth, and lips shut, how will you speak?' yen said, 'teacher, do you have (any way to speak) or not?' chang said, 'i have lost my descendants.' ---- ma tsu's permutations of assertion and denial --!-- a monk asked grand master ma, 'please, teacher, going beyond the permutations of assertion and denial, directly point out to me the meaning of the coming from the west.' master ma said, 'i'm tired today and can't explain for you. go ask chih tsang.' when the monk asked chih tsang,j tsang said, 'why didn't you ask the teacher? ' the monk said, 'the teacher had me come here to ask you.' tsang said, 'i have a headache today and can't explain for you. go ask elder brother hai.' when the monk asked elder brother hai (pai chang), hai said, 'at this point, after all, i don't understand.' when the monk related this to grand master ma, master ma said, 'tsang's head is white, hai's head is black.' ---- chin niu's rice pail --!-- every day at mealtime, master chin niu would personally take the rice pail and do a dance in front of the monks' hall: laughing aloud, he would say, 'bodhisattvas, come eat! ' hsueh tou said, 'though he acted like this, chin niu was not good-hearted.' a monk asked ch'ang ch'ing, 'when the man of old said, 'bodhisattvas, come eat!' what was his meaning? ' ch'ing said, 'much like joyful praise on the occasion of a meal.' ---- wu chiu's unjust beating --!-- a monk came to wu chiu from the congregation of the master of ting chou. wu chiu asked, 'how does ting chou's dharma path compare to here? ' the monk said, 'it's not different.' chiu said, 'if it's not different, then you should go back there,' and then hit him. the monk said, 'there are eyes on the staff: you shouldn't carelessly hit people.' chiu said, 'today i've hit one,' and hit him again three times. the monk thereupon went out. chiu said, 'all along there's been someone receiving an unjust beating.' the monk turned around and said, 'what can i do? the handle is in your hands, teacher.' chiu said, 'if you want, i'll tum it over to you.' the monk came up to chiu, grabbed the staff out of his hands, and hit him three times. chiu said, 'an unjust beating, an unjust beating! ' the monk said, 'there's someone receiving it.' chiu said, 'i hit this fellow carelessly.' immediately the monk bowed. chiu said, 'yet you act this way.' the monk laughed loudly and went out. chiu said, 'that's all it comes to, that's all it comes to.' ---- tan hsia's have you eaten yet? --!-- tan hsia asked a monk, 'where have you come from? ' the monk said, 'from down the mountain.' hsia said, 'have you eaten yet or not? ' the monk said, 'i have eaten.' hsia said, 'did the person who brought you the food to eat have eyes or not? ' the monk was speechless. ch'ang ch'ing asked pao fu, 'to give someone food to eat is ample requital of the debt of kindness: why wouldn't he have eyes? ' fu said, 'giver and receiver are both blind.' ch'ang ch'ing said, 'if they exhausted their activity, would they still turn out blind? ' fu said, 'can you say that i'm blind?' ---- yun men's cake --!-- a monk asked yun men, 'what is talk that goes beyond buddhas and patriarchs? ' men said, 'cake.' ---- sixteen bodhisattvas go in to bathe --!-- in olden times there were sixteen bodhisattvas. when it was time for monks to wash, the bodhisattvas filed in to bathe. suddenly they awakened to the basis of water. all of you ch'an worthies, how will you understand their saying, 'subtle feeling reveals illumination, and we have achieved the station of sons of buddha'? to realize this you too must be extremely piercing and penetrating. ---- t'ou tzu's all sounds --!-- a monk asked t'ou tzu, 'all sounds are the sounds of buddha-right or wrong? ' t'ou tzu said, 'right.' the monk said, 'teacher, doesn't your asshole make farting sounds? ' t'ou tzu then hit him. again the monk asked, 'coarse words or subtle talk, all returns to the primary meaning-right or wrong? ' t'ou tzu said, 'right.' the monk said, 'can i call you an ass, teacher? ' t'ou tzu then hit him. ---- chao chou's newborn baby --!-- a monk asked chao chou, 'does a newborn baby also have the sixth consciousness? ' chao chou said, '(like) tossing a ball on swift-flowing water.' the monk also asked t'ou tzu, 'what is the meaning of 'tossing a ball on swift-flowing water'? ' t'ou tzu said, 'moment to moment, nonstop flow.' ---- yao shan's shooting the elk of elks --!-- a monk asked yao shan, 'on a level field, in the shallow grass, the elk and deer form a herd: how can one shoot the elk of elks?  shan said, 'look-an arrow!  the monk let himself fall down. shan said, 'attendant, drag this dead fellow out. the monk then ran out. shan said, 'this fellow playing with a mud ball-what end will there be to it? ' hsueh tau commented saying, 'though he lived for three steps, after five steps he had to die.' ---- ta lung's hard and fast body of reality --!-- a monk asked ta lung, 'the physical body rots away: what is the hard and fast body of reality? ' lung said, 'the mountain flowers bloom like brocade, the valley streams are brimming blue as indigo.' ---- yun men's ancient buddhas and the pillar --!-- yun men, teaching the community, said, 'the ancient buddhas and the pillar merge-what level of mental activity is this?' he himself said on their behalf, 'on south mountain clouds gather, on north mountain rain falls.' ---- vimalakirti's gate of nonduality --!-- vimalakirti asked manjusri,  'what is a bodhisattva's entry into the dharma gate of nonduality? ' manjusri said, 'according to what i think, in all things, no words, no speech, no demonstration and no recognition, to leave behind all questions and answers;  this is entering the dharma gate of nonduality.' then manjusri asked vimalakirti, 'we have each already spoken. now you should tell us, good man, what is a bodhisattva's entry into the dharma gate of nonduality? ' hsueh tau said, 'what did vimalakirti say?' he also said, 'completely exposed.' ---- the hermit of t'ung feng makes a tiger's roar --!-- a monk came to the place of the hermit of t'ung feng and asked, 'if you suddenly encountered a tiger here, what then?' the hermit made a tiger's roar. the monk then made a gesture of fright.the hermit laughed aloud. the monk said, 'you old thief! 'the hermit said, 'what can you do about me? ' the monk gave up. hsueh tou said, 'this is all right, but these two wicked thieves only knew how to cover their ears to steal the bel.'  ---- yun men's kitchen pantry and main gate --!-- yun men imparted some words saying, 'everyone has a light;  when you look at it, you don't see it and it's dark and dim. what is everybody's light? ' he himself answered on their behalf, 'the kitchen pantry and the main gate.' he also said, 'a good thing isn't as good as nothing.' ---- medicine and disease subdue each other --!-- yun men, teaching his community, said, 'medicine and disease subdue each other:  the whole earth is medicine; what is your self? ' ---- hsuan sha's guiding and aiding living beings --!-- hsuan sha, teaching the community, said, 'the old adepts everywhere all speak of guiding and aiding living beings. supposing they encountered three kinds of sick person, how would they guide them? with a blind person, they could pick up the gavel or raise the whisk, but he wouldn't see. with a deaf person, he wouldn't hear the point of words. with a mute person, if they had him speak, he wouldn't be able to speak. but how would they guide such people? if they couldn't guide these people, then the buddha dharma has no effect.' a monk asked yun men for instruction on this. yun men said, 'bow.' the monk bowed and rose. yun men poked at him with his staff; the monk drew back. yun men said, 'you're not blind.' then yun men called him closer; when the monk approached, men said, 'you're not dea£.' next yun men said, 'do you understand? ' the monk said, 'i don't understand.' yun men said, 'you're not mute.' at this the monk had an insight. ---- the hands and eyes of the bodhisattva of great compassion --!-- yun yen asked tao wu, 'what does the bodhisattva of great compassion use so many hands and eyes for? ' wu said, 'it's like someone reaching back groping for a pillow in the middle of the night.' yen said, 'i understand.' wu said, 'how do you understand it? ' yen said, 'all over the body are hands and eyes.'' wu said, 'you have said quite a bit there, but you've only said eighty percent of it.' yen said, 'what do you say, elder brother? ' wu said, 'throughout the body are hands and eyes.' ---- chih men's body of wisdom --!-- a monk asked chih men, 'what is the body of wisdom? ' chih men said, 'an oyster swallowing the bright moon.' the monk asked, 'what is the function of wisdom? ' chih men said, 'a rabbit getting pregnant.' ---- yen kuan's rhinoceros --!-- one day yen kuan called to his attendant, 'bring me my rhinoceros-horn fan.' the attendant said, 'the fan is broken.' yen kuan said, 'if the fan is broken, bring the rhinoceros back to me.' the attendant had no reply. t'ou tzu said, 'i do not refuse to bring it out, but i fear the horn on its head will be imperfect.' hsueh tou commented, 'i want an imperfect horn.' shih shuang said, 'if i return it to the master, then i won't have it.' hsueh tou commented, 'the rhino is still there.' tzu fu drew a circle and wrote the word 'rhino' inside it. hsueh tou commented, 'why did you not bring it out before? '  pao fu said, 'the master is aged; he should ask someone else.' hsueh tou commented, 'what a pity to have worked hard without accomplishing anything.'  ---- the world honored one ascends the seat --!-- one day the world honored one ascended his seat. manjusri struck the gavel and said, 'clearly behold the dharma of the king of dharma; the dharma of the king of dharma is thus.' the world honored one then got down off the seat. ---- ta kuang does a dance --!-- a monk asked ta kuang, 'ch'ang ch'ing said, 'joyful praise on the occasion of a meal'-what was the essence of his meaning? a ta kuang did a dance. the monk bowed.j kuang said, 'what have you seen, that you bow? ' the monk did a dance. kuang said, 'you wild fox spirit! ' ---- the surangama scripture's not seeing --!-- the surangama scripture says, 'when i do not see, why do you not see my not seeing?  if you see my not seeing, naturally that is not the characteristic of not seeing. if you don't see my not seeing/ it is naturally not a thing-how could it not be you? ' ---- ch'ang ch'ing's three poisons --!-- ch'ang ch'ing once said, 'rather say that saints have the three poisons,! but do not say that the tathagata has two kinds of speech. i do not say the tathagata is speechless, just that he doesn't have two kinds of speech.' pao fu said, 'what is tathagata speech? ' ch'ing said, 'how could a deaf man hear? ' pao fu said, 'i knew you were talking on the secondary level.' ch'ing said, 'what is tathagata speech? ' pao fu said, 'go drink tea.' ---- chao chou's three turning words --!-- chao chou expressed three turning words to his community. ('a gold buddha does not pass through a furnace; a wood buddha does not pass through fire; a mud buddha does not pass through water.') ---- the diamond cutter scripture's scornful revilement --!-- the diamond cutter scripture says, 'if one is scornfully reviled by others, this person has done wicked acts in previous ages which should bring him down into evil ways,j but because of the scorn and vilification by others in the present age, the wicked action of former ages is thereby extinguished.' ---- t'ien p'ing's travels on foot --!-- when the master of t'ien p'ing was travelling on foot, he called on hsi yuan. he always would say, 'do not say you understand the buddhist teaching; i cannot find a single man who can quote a saying. one day hsi yuan saw him from a distance and called him by name: 'ts'ung yi! ll p'ing raised his head: hsi yuan said, 'wrong! p'ing went two or three steps; hsi yuan again said, 'wrong!  p'ing approached;  hsi huan said, 'these two wrongs just now: were they my wrongs or your wrongs? '  p'ing said, 'my wrongs.' hsi yuan said, 'wrong! '  p'ing gave up.t hsi yuan said, 'stay here for the summer and wait for me to discuss these two wrongs with you.t but p'ing immediately went away. later, when he was dwelling in a temple, he said to his community,l 'when i was first travelling on foot, i was blown by the wind of events to elder ssu ming's place: twice in a row he said 'wrong!' and tried to keep me there over the summer to wait for him to deal with me. i did not say it was wrong then; when i set out for the south, i already knew that it was wrong.'  ---- su tsung's ten-body controller --!-- emperor su tsung asked national teacher chung, 'what is the ten-body controller? ' the national teacher said, 'patron, walk on vairocana's head.' the emperor said, 'i don't understand.' the national teacher said, 'don't acknowledge your own pure body of reality.' ---- paling's blown hair sword --!-- a monk asked pa ling, 'what is the blown hair sword? 'a pa ling said, 'each branch of coral supports the moon.'  ----
